# Mindfulness, learning and the brain

Author: Guy Claxton, University of Bristol, UK
I have tried to sketch an approach to the complex phenomenon that go by the name of ‘mindfulness’ that both does justice to this complexity and depth and also offers a way of thinking about mindfulness in evolutionary, and neural terms: terms that enable us to ask questions like: where did mindfulness come from ? What kind of consciousness is it ? What was I for, before it was co-opted by spiritual and therapeutic kinds of discourse and practice ? And how do brains do it ? In essence, I am suggesting that human brains seem to have developed, for good evolutionary reasons, a degree of facility with imaginative empathy and as-if identification; and that mindfulness capitalizes on this to create what is probably a uniquely human form of learning-or rather unlearning.

Keywords: mindfulness; learning; consciousness; brain.

The highest activities of consciousness have their origins in physical occurrences in the brain, just as the loveliest melodies are not sublime to be expressed by notes.
(This is an analogy for consciousness; Just like a melody is composed of notes which are not too mesmerizing alone, consciousness may be composed of complex patterns of neural activity of brain)

This paper looks at mindfulness through the lenses of cognitive neuroscience. To do this, I need to start by laying out a series of propositions that are just plain obvious to me. They form the pretheoretical framework for the discussion that follows. They need spelling out because I have learned that, though they are pretty unexceptionable in scientific circles, they are not accepted as self-evident by everyone. People who hold different views often do so vigorously. For example, some people dispute that consciousness is a phenomenon exclusively associated with brains of a certain kind. Some of them believe that consciousness is the primary stuff of whole universe, rather life ‘energy’ in physics. It’s not just that rocks ‘have’ consciousness; they are, in some way, mode of consciousness. We may need a word for such primordial stuff, but I think it’s needlessly confusing if we call it ‘consciousness’. I have learned that it can be a waste of time to try to argue about these propositions. An ocean of philosophical ink has been split trying to defend and justify these assumptions, and trying to undermine other people’s. My preference is to just build a platform, and then explore what can be seen from the vantage point it creates. So I will just state them, to be clear, and then work within them. Ultimately the proof of the pudding is in whether this presuppositional framework leads in interesting directions.