# Phantom Hits & Transition States

I am using Hermes like architecture for prediction off-chip page walk accesses. The architecture predicts whether page walk wil go off-chip in search of next page table address. Two packets are sent one is regular (reg) and other is special(ddrp) packets. Since, we are dealing with page tables. Let me introduce few terms. The page table entry which holds address of page is 8 byte. Therefore a 64 byte cache block holds 8 such entries. The page is allocated by page fault mechanism and its address is stored in another page which is part of page table. Since the requested page is faulted and allcoated just now. The  cache block holding this page table entry have only one valid 8 byte page table entry and rest 7 are in invalid state. The next access to same cache block is hit in cache since tag matches but assume this time it is looking for one of 7 invalid entries (not yet allocated). Hardware read this 8 byte entry although invalid and bring it to MMU (we are doing page walk!). MMU checks the valid bit with in 8 byte entry (apart from virtual-to-physical page mapping, it has attribute bits). There it determine the entry is invalid and send the page fault signal to OS. Then OS allocates a page and instead of transferring whole 64 byte block to cache it sends the missing 8 byte entry. This is how mechansim works. Now in my simulator, i dont hold the block level information and pass it along as requested for page table. Rather, i have a central structure, where i do just lookup based on page number, block id and then entry index and satisfy my cache read request for translation blocks. For each 8 byte entry i have by default set page-fault bit to 1. When fault is read, i allocate the page, update entry with page address and reset page-fault bit to 0. Since i am modeling reg and ddrp request, i faced the problem where ddrp which always moves ahead of reg reset the page-fault bit to 0. At the same time block is in the cache, the bit is also reflected for it since they are sharing central structure. The reg request should see page-fault=1 but ddrp resets it. There is this incosistency, which increases the false-positive rate of my predictor. Because of which precision drops. The issue came to my notice when i built a oracle predictor which truly knows the off-chip prediction (i do soft lookup on all caches and if data is not there then oracle tells  data is off-chip and a ddrp is sent to DRAM controller where it try to prefetch the page table block). Since oracle has already predicted off-chip, but ddrp packet resets the page-fault=0, confusing the reg packet which sees the block in cache and valid entry as well. Instead of forced miss, it says hit and during training false-positive rate is increased. To solve this problem, i introduced the transition state (TS) for page-fault (PF) flag. 

It works as follows at DRAM:
1. PF=1 and ddrp packet ---> PF=TS
2. PF=1 and reg packet ---> PF=0
3. PF=0 and ddrp/reg packet --> No change
4. PF=1 and ddrp packet --> No change
5. PF=1 and reg packet ---> PF=0 

